---
layout: post
title: Leaving the Atocha Station and Infinite Jest
date: 2016-01-03 23:00:00 -0400
section: other
tags:
- reading
- authenticity
- drugs
- objects
- Leaving the Atocha Station
- Ben Lerner
- Infinite Jest
- David Foster Wallace
- My Struggle
- Karl Ove Knausgaard

---

This is another post on *Leaving the Atocha Station*[^atocha-cite], in which I draw a few brief connections between it and *Infinite Jest*[^ij-cite]. I won't fully elaborate on the connections; this post is simply a link between the ideas discussed more thoroughly in my [previous post on *Atocha*][atocha-post] and my [earlier essay on *Infinite Jest*][ij-post].

[^atocha-cite]: Page references are to: Ben Lerner, *Leaving the Atocha Station*, Granta, 2013.
[^ij-cite]: Page references are to: David Foster Wallace, *Infinite Jest*, Back Bay Books, 1996.
[atocha-post]: /2016/01/03/atocha-authenticity/
[ij-post]: /2014/11/21/ij-transc/


## What you see and hear

The second paragraph of *Infinite Jest* is one sentence long:

> I am in here. [*IJ*, p. 3]

The sentiment (expressed here in Hal's first-person narration) is repeated out loud a few pages later:

> "I'm in here. ... I am not what you see and hear ... I'm not", I say. [*IJ*, p. 12]

Amidst the drama and commotion in the novel's opening scene, and amidst Wallace's sprawling prose, these short, plain sentences have a certain gravity to them. And indeed they end up being significant and tragic.

I bring this up because of the following striking line from *Atocha*, first quoted as part of one of Adam's poems:

> I have never been here.  
> Understand?  
> You have never seen me. [*Atocha*, p. 128]

And in *Atocha*, too, the sentiment is later repeated, this time given within Adam's narrative:

> I have never been here, I said to myself. You have never seen me. [*Atocha*, p. 178].

I personally think this is an explicit reference from *Atocha* to *Infinite Jest*, though I can't be sure of course. In both texts, these lines indicate the main characters (Hal and Adam) dealing with the fact that the outside world cannot see their authentic selves, that they are unable to communicate or interact faithfully with the world.


## Drugs 

Both texts also prominently feature drug-use. In the opening scene of *Infinite Jest*, Hal's inner self is extremely disconnected from what the outside world perceives, and it's intimated that this has to do with his taking DMZ or his ingestion of the weird fungus-growing-on-a-fungus as a kid (or probably both). More chronic for Hal is his addiction to marijuana, intimately tied to his general anhedonia. Similarly, Adam's chronic drug usage is a big factor in the distance from himself and the world around him:

> Many people, I believed, used similar drugs to remove themselves form their experience, but because, for as long as I could remember, I always alread felt removed from my experience, I took the drug to intensify the vantage from said remove, and so experienced it as an intensification of presence, but only at my customary distance from myself; maybe, when I panicked, that distance was collapsing. [*Atocha*, p. 67]

And of course his drug usage is partly medication for his depression.

Relatedly, note that the opening section of *Infinite Jest* has Hal trying to calculate a bunch of facial expressions in dealing with his "condition", e.g.:

> I believe I appear neutral, maybe even pleasant, though I've been coached to err on the side of neutrality and not attempt what would feel to me like a pleasant expression or smile. [*IJ*, p. 3]

Adam does the same throughout *Atocha*, e.g.:

> I was acutely aware of not being attractive enough for my surroundings; luckily I had a strategy for such situations, one I had developed over many visits to New York with the dim kids of the stars: I opened my eyes a little more widely than normal, opened them to a very specific point, raising my eyebrows and also allowing my mouth to curl up into the implication of a smile. I held this look steady once it had obtained, a look that communicated incredulity cut with familiarity, a boredom arrested only by a vaguely anthropological interest in my surroundings, a look that contained a dose of contempt I hoped could be read as political, as insinuating that, after a frivolous night, I would be returning to the front lines of some struggle that would render whatever I experienced in such company null. The goal of this look was to make my insufficiencies appear chosen, to give my unstylish hair and clothes the force of protest [*Atocha*, p. 26]


## Objects

Let me start this section by quoting my absolute favorite passage from *Atocha*:

> Her Spanish, like Teresa's poem, became a repository for whatever meaning I assigned it, and I felt I understood, although I knew I was talking to myself. It was as if she said: Think about the necklace. Think about the making of the necklace. About Isabel's brother's notebook. I could hear what she was actually saying beneath this and I heard myself respond but all of that was very distant. It was as if she said: Imagine her brother writing. Think of the little scrap of paper Teresa tore from her novel and put into your notebook. Think of the hash transported inside one body as a solid and expelled and sold and then drawn into your body as vapor and gas. Think of the bombers purchasing the backpacks. Always think of the objects. Think of the necklaces and novels and bodies torn apart by the blast. Think of the making of the necklaces and the novels and the bodies and Isabel's brother in the crushed red car. But then think of a poster of Michael Jordan on the wall of Isabel's brother's room while he wrote the years down in the notebook. Where is that poster now. And think of the field opposite the telephone pole her brother wrapped her car around. How you can turn your attention away from the crushed red car and his body and walk into the field where nothing is happening, just indifferent wind in the indifferent grass, but a particular wind in particular grass. You can stay there for as long as you want, easily blocking out the sirens. Or you can enter the poster with the sea of camera flashes as Michael Jordan jumps and you can leave the arena as the crowd is roaring and walk into the Chicago of the recent past where novels are being written and necklaces are being made and gases are being inhaled and dates are being memorized by brains and brains destroyed in crashes. You can see all of this from a great height and zoom out until it is no longer visible or you can zoom in on the writing hand or the face of the dead, zoom in until it's no longer a face. Or you can click on something and drag it. You can adjust the color or you can make it black and white. You can view any object from any angle or multiple angles simultaneously or you can shut your eyes and listen to the crown in the arena or the sirens slowly approaching the red car or the sound of the pen writing down the years as silver is hammered and shaped. [pp. 144--145]

This emphasis on objects is extremely reminscent of Lyle's crucial advice in *Infinite Jest*: "Do not underestimate objects." In both texts I think this call to focus on concrete objects has to do with the necessity of actively relating to the physical world, to avoid getting lost in the abstract self.

I.e. you have to be tied to the world, and experience your experiences. It's dangerous to abstract everything away into ideas and images that you can manipulate and drag and zoom and distance yourself from. This idea was also central to some of [my thoughts on Knausgaard's *My Struggle*][my-struggle-post]. Both Knausgaard and Lerner suggest that having all this data available at our fingertips makes things abstract, makes things lose emotional meaning and nuance, "make[s] it black and white". Knausgaard most poignantly expresses these ideas in the general context of death, and Lerner does something similar in Adam's reaction to the Atocha bombing:

> I opened a browser, called up the *New York Times*, and clicked on the giant headline. The article described the helicopters I could hear above me. ...
>
> I went back up to my apartment and refreshed the *Times*; the number of estimated dead was now around two hundred, at least a thousand injured. I considered walking back to Atocha, but instead I opened *El País* in another window and the *Guardian* in a third. I sat smoking and refreshing the home pages and watching the numbers change. I could feel the newspaper accounts modifying or replacing my memory of what I'd seen; was there a word for that feeling?

[my-struggle-post]: /2015/12/24/my-struggle-book-1/
